# How to Pronounce Chinese Names a Little Better
###### 2024 December 5<sup>th</sup>

Mainland China uses the pinyin system to write Mandarin words and names with
English letters.[^exceptions] Pinyin wasn't designed to be intuitive for
English speakers, and it's common for our first guess to be so far off the mark
that a listener can't even recognize their own name. An hour or so of effort is
enough for most English speakers to pronounce Mandarin names
poorly-but-not-incomprehensibly, similar to how we try our best with French or
Russian. Here's what I think are the bare minimum rules you need to memorize to
get there:

[^exceptions]: Pinyin isn't used in Cantonese or other Chinese dialects, and
    it's not as widely used in Taiwan. China officially adopted pinyin in 1958,
    and earlier emigrants also spelled their names differently.

## Consonants

"Zh" sounds like "j", both as in "jump" (not "genre").[^differences] The city
of Beijing is _bay&#8288;-&#8288;jing_, and the city of Guangzhou is
_gwahng&#8288;-&#8288;jo_. Zhou Enlai, China's premier from 1949-76, is _jo
un&#8288;-&#8288;lai_.

[^differences]: "Zh" and "j" are different in Mandarin, and the English "j"
    isn't quite right for either of them, but it's the closest sound we have.
    The same is true of "ch"/"q" and "sh"/"x" below.

"Q" sounds like "ch". The Qing dynasty is pronounced _ching_.

"X" sounds like "sh". President Xi Jinping is _shee jeen&#8288;-&#8288;ping_.
Deng Xiaoping, China's leader from 1978-92, is _dung shao&#8288;-&#8288;ping_.
The Xia dynasty is pronounced _shah_.

"C" sounds like _ts_, as in "hats" or "pizza". Liu Cixin, author of The
Three-Body Problem, is _lee&#8288;-&#8288;oh tsuh&#8288;-&#8288;sheen_. (More
about that _uh_ vowel below.)

Other consonants are close enough to how they're spelled.

## "I" vowels

Most "i" vowels sound like _ee_. We saw this above with Beijing, the Qing
dynasty, and Xi Jinping.

There are exactly three consonant-vowel pairs where "i" sounds like _uh_: "zi",
"ci", and "si", pronounced _zuh_, _tsuh_, and _suh_.[^lucy] We saw this above
with Liu Cixin. Crouching Tiger Hidden Dragon actress Zhang Ziyi is _jahng
zuh&#8288;-&#8288;yee_. The province of Sichuan is
_suh&#8288;-&#8288;chwahn_.[^szechuan]

[^lucy]: Here's "Sichuan" [pronounced by a native speaker][sichuan]. Clearly
    _uh_ is a poor approximation of this "i". The American "could"/"foot" vowel
    (which actually matches the "e" in e.g. Henan and Zhejiang provinces) is
    closer, but there's no phonetic spelling for it that won't confuse
    untrained speakers. The best approximation of this "i" that's remotely
    familiar to Americans might be [Lucille Ball's trademark "eugh"(?)][lucy],
    but that's hard to say and impossible to spell. An advantage of starting
    with _uh_ is that we tend to de-emphasize it, minimizing the damage.

[sichuan]: https://youtu.be/5I6Shx3K_tU?t=6
[lucy]: https://youtu.be/KkOur9y5rVc?t=16

[^szechuan]: "Szechuan" and similar spellings predate the pinyin system.

There are exactly four consonant-vowel pairs where "i" sounds like _ur_: "zhi",
"chi", "shi", and "ri", pronounced _jur_, _chur_, _shur_, and _rur_.[^regional]
Qin Shi Huang, who became the first emperor of China in 221 BC, is _cheen shur
hwahng_. The website Zhihu, the Chinese version of Quora, is
_jur&#8288;-&#8288;hoo_.

[^regional]: This "i" varies a lot between different regional accents. _Ur_ is
    the Beijing/northern/official pronunciation.

Finally, when "i" comes after "u" it sounds like _ay_. The Sui dynasty is
pronounced _sway_.

Other vowels will still surprise you, but not as badly as "i". Good luck!
